
The three undergrad Astronomy lab courses (optical, radio, and infrared)
constitute the crown jewel of the Department's undergraduate
program. These courses are famous within United States research
institutions because their students perform so well in summer internships
and graduate schools. The radio course won the campus Educational
Initiative Award in 1966. Carl Heiles, as instructor of the radio
course, received the campus Noyce Prize for excellence in undergraduate
teaching in 2002. James Graham, as instructor of the optical (infrared?)
course, received the Noyce Prize in XXXX. [At least I think he did!]

The radio lab course is famous among radio astronomers because its
students know more about the techniques of radio observing, including
signal processing, than the typical radio-based astronomy Ph.D--even
BERKELEY radio-based Ph.D.s. Invited talks about the radio lab are
regularly featured in the educational/instructional sessions at the
national URSI and AAS meetings. Typical responses to these talks are the
one by CalTech Professor Tom Phillips, Director of the Caltech
Submillimeter Observatory (CSO) on Mauna Kea, to the effect "I wish I
had such a course when I was a graduate student" (And remember: our
courses are for UNDERgraduates!).

The lab courses rely on the two telescopes--one optical, one radio--at
the Leuschner Observatory site. For the optical, the inland location is
important because skies are usually clear even when the Bay Area is
fogged in, and in addition the sky is dark enough for "real
astronomy". For the radio, Leuschner is shielded by the hills from
strong Bay-Area interference sources such as airports, and this makes it
radio-quiet enough--again--to do "real astronomy".

Our current Leuschner radio telescope has several intrinsic problems and
we have (through Geoff Bower) a ~$120K NSF instructional grant to
upgrade it with a different dish and, finally, a capable mount.  The
upgrade also includes a new control system and a new wide-band digital
backend that will enable students to learn about, and observe, pulsars,
polarization, and weak and polarized spectral lines. These new
capabilities are also featured in the "broader impacts" sections of
Heiles's NSF grants.  This upgrade will begin in October, just four
weeks away, and will take almost a year--at no cost to UCB or the
Department.
